- There comes a point where we need to stop just pulling people out of the river. We need to go upstream and find out why they’re falling in. —Bishop Desmond Tutu
- will die as a result of one of the chronic diseases of aging that I call the Four Horsemen: heart disease, cancer, neurodegenerative disease, or type 2 diabetes and related metabolic dysfunction.
- One macronutrient, in particular, demands more of our attention than most people realize: not carbs, not fat, but protein becomes critically important as we age.
- Exercise is by far the most potent longevity “drug.” No other intervention does nearly as much to prolong our lifespan and preserve our cognitive and physical function. But most people don’t do nearly enough—and exercising the wrong way can do as much harm as good.
- Our tactics in Medicine 3.0 fall into five broad domains: exercise, nutrition, sleep, emotional health, and exogenous molecules, meaning drugs, hormones, or supplements.
- So we will break down this thing called exercise into its most important components: strength, stability, aerobic efficiency, and peak aerobic capacity. Increasing your limits in each of these areas is necessary if you are hoping to reach your limit of lifespan and healthspan.
- Those who live to their 110th birthday qualify for the ultra-elite cadre of “supercentenarians,” the world’s smallest age group, with only about three hundred members worldwide at any given time (although the number fluctuates). Just to give you a sense of how exclusive this club is, for every supercentenarian in the world at this writing, there are about nine billionaires.
- The real obstacle here is a regulatory framework rooted in Medicine 2.0, which does not (yet) recognize “slowing aging” and “delaying disease” as fully legitimate end points. This would represent a Medicine 3.0 use for this drug, where we would be using a drug to help healthy people stay healthy, rather than to cure or relieve a specific ailment.
- It doesn’t take much visceral fat to cause problems. Let’s say you are a forty-year-old man who weighs two hundred pounds. If you have 20 percent body fat, making you more or less average (50th percentile) for your age and sex, that means you are carrying 40 pounds of fat throughout your body. Even if just 4.5 pounds of that is visceral fat, you would be considered at exceptionally high risk for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes, in the top 5 percent of risk for your age and sex. This is why I insist my patients undergo a DEXA scan annually—and I am far more interested in their visceral fat than their total body fat.
- Today over 11 percent of the US adult population, one in nine, has clinical type 2 diabetes, according to a 2022 CDC report, including more than 29 percent of adults over age sixty-five. Another 38 percent of US adults—more than one in three—meet at least one of the criteria for prediabetes. That means that nearly half of the population is either on the road to type 2 diabetes or already there.
- Back then, nearly fifteen years ago, the apoB test (simply, measuring the concentration of apoB-tagged particles) was not commonly done. Since then, evidence has piled up pointing to apoB as far more predictive of cardiovascular disease than simply LDL-C, the standard “bad cholesterol” measure.
- I have all my patients tested for apoB regularly, and you should ask for the same test the next time you see your doctor. (Don’t be waved off by nonsensical arguments about “cost”: It’s about twenty to thirty dollars.)
- I was still in my thirties, yet I likely already had all three of the major prerequisites for heart disease: significant lipoprotein burden or apoB, LDL oxidation or modification (leading to the plaques that my calcium scan revealed), and a high level of background inflammation. None of these is enough to guarantee that someone will develop heart disease, but all three are necessary to develop it.
- This is not an atypical scenario: when a patient comes to me and says their father or grandfather or aunt, or all three, died of “premature” heart disease, elevated Lp(a) is the first thing I look for. It is the most prevalent hereditary risk factor for heart disease, and its danger is amplified by the fact that it is still largely flying under the radar of Medicine 2.0, although that is beginning to change.
- We test every single patient for Lp(a) during their first blood draw. Because elevated Lp(a) is largely genetic, the test need only be done once (and cardiovascular disease guidelines are beginning to advise a once-a-lifetime test for it anyway).
- When I look at a patient’s blood panel for the first time, my eyes immediately dart to two numbers: apoB and Lp(a). I look at the other numbers, too, but these two tell me the most when it comes to predicting their risk of ASCVD. ApoB not only tells me the concentration of LDL particles (which, you’ll recall, is more predictive of disease than the concentration of cholesterol found within LDL particles, LDL-C), but it also captures the concentration of VLDL particles, which as members of the apoB family can also contribute to atherosclerosis. Furthermore, even someone whose apoB is low can still have a dangerously elevated Lp(a).[*6]
- Many doctors, and in fact many of you reading this, might be shocked to see such a low LDL-C target: 10 to 20 mg/dL? Most guidelines consider lowering LDL-C to 70 mg/dL to be “aggressive,” even for secondary prevention in high-risk patients, such as those who have already had a heart attack.
- You’ll note that I don’t pay much attention to HDL-C, because while having very low HDL-C is associated with higher risk, it does not appear to be causal. This is why drugs aimed at raising HDL-C have generally failed to reduce risk and events in clinical trials.
- Monounsaturated fats, found in high quantities in extra virgin olive oil, macadamia nuts, and avocados (among other foods), do not have this effect, so I tend to push my patients to consume more of these, up to about 60 percent of total fat intake. The point is not necessarily to limit fat overall but to shift to fats that promote a better lipid profile.
- Statins are far and away the most prescribed class of drugs for lipid management, but there are several other options that might be right for a given individual, and often we need to combine classes of drugs, so it’s not uncommon for a patient to take two lipid-lowering drugs that operate via distinct mechanisms. These are typically thought of as “cholesterol-lowering” medications, but I think we are better served to think about them in terms of increasing apoB clearance, enhancing the body’s ability to get apoBs out of circulation. That’s really our goal. Mostly this is done by amplifying the activity of LDL receptors (LDLR) in the liver, which absorb cholesterol from the bloodstream.
- Typically our first line of defense (or attack), statins inhibit cholesterol synthesis, prompting the liver to increase the expression of LDLR, taking more LDL out of circulation. They may have other benefits too, including an apparent anti-inflammatory effect, so while I don’t think statins should be dissolved into the drinking water, as some have suggested, I do think they are very helpful drugs for reducing apoB or LDL concentration in many patients.
- But for those who can tolerate them (i.e., most people), I deploy them early and often. (For more on specific statin and other apoB-lowering medications, see the sidebar on this page.)
- I advocate early, aggressive, and broad screening for my patients—such as colonoscopy (or other colorectal cancer screening) at age forty, as opposed to the standard recommendation of forty-five or fifty—because the evidence is overwhelming that it’s much easier to deal with most cancers in their early stages. I am also cautiously optimistic about pairing these tried-and-true staples of cancer screening with emerging methods, such as “liquid biopsies,” which can detect trace amounts of cancer-cell DNA via a simple blood test.
- But the results of these studies suggest that maybe it’s not such a good idea to increase the level of insulin in someone who has cancer. More studies need to be done, but the working hypothesis is that because cancer cells are so metabolically greedy, they are therefore more vulnerable than normal cells to a reduction in nutrients—or more likely, a reduction in insulin, which activates the PI3K pathway essential to the Warburg effect.
- Like metabolism, immunotherapy did not figure in The Emperor of All Maladies. It was barely on the radar when the book was published in 2010. But when Ken Burns made his documentary based on the book just five years later, both immunotherapy and Steve Rosenberg were featured very prominently, which speaks to the degree to which our thinking about cancer and especially immunotherapy has begun to change, just in the last decade.
- This is why I’m such an advocate for early screening. It’s a simple truth that treating smaller tumors with fewer mutations is far easier than if we wait for the cancer to advance and potentially acquire mutations that help it evade our treatments. The only way to catch it early is with aggressive screening.
- Although Alzheimer’s disease was first named in the early 1900s, the phenomenon of “senility” has been remarked on since ancient times. Plato believed that because advancing age seemingly “gives rise to all manners of forgetfulness as well as stupidity,” older men were unsuited for leadership positions requiring acumen or judgment. William Shakespeare gave us an unforgettable portrayal of an old man struggling with his failing mind in King Lear.
- Strength training is likely just as important. A study looking at nearly half a million patients in the United Kingdom found that grip strength, an excellent proxy for overall strength, was strongly and inversely associated with the incidence of dementia
- One other somewhat recent addition to my thinking on dementia (and ASCVD while we’re at it) prevention is the use of dry saunas. Until about 2019 I was very skeptical of the data linking sauna use to brain and heart health. However, the more time I spend buried in this literature, the more I become convinced by the magnitude of the benefit, the uniformity of the studies, and the mechanisms providing plausibility. I’m not quite as confident that regular sauna use will reduce your risk of Alzheimer’s disease as I am that exercise will do so, but I am much more confident than I was at the outset of my journey. The best interpretation I can draw from the literature suggests that at least four sessions per week, of at least twenty minutes per session, at 179 degrees Fahrenheit (82 degrees Celsius) or hotter seems to be the sweet spot to reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s by about 65 percent (and the risk of ASCVD by 50 percent).
- Broadly, our strategy should be based on the following principles: WHAT’S GOOD FOR THE HEART IS GOOD FOR THE BRAIN. That is, vascular health (meaning low apoB, low inflammation, and low oxidative stress) is crucial to brain health. WHAT’S GOOD FOR THE LIVER (AND PANCREAS) IS GOOD FOR THE BRAIN. Metabolic health is crucial to brain health. TIME IS KEY. We need to think about prevention early, and the more the deck is stacked against you genetically, the harder you need to work and the sooner you need to start. As with cardiovascular disease, we need to play a very long game. OUR MOST POWERFUL TOOL FOR PREVENTING COGNITIVE DECLINE IS EXERCISE. We’ve talked a lot about diet and metabolism, but exercise appears to act in multiple ways (vascular, metabolic) to preserve brain health; we’ll get into more detail in Part III, but exercise—lots of it—is a foundation of our Alzheimer’s-prevention program.
- In Medicine 3.0, we have five tactical domains that we can address in order to alter someone’s health. The first is exercise, which I consider to be by far the most potent domain in terms of its impact on both lifespan and healthspan. Of course, exercise is not just one thing, so I break it down into its components of aerobic efficiency, maximum aerobic output (VO2 max), strength, and stability, all of which we’ll discuss in more detail. Next is diet or nutrition—or as I prefer to call it, nutritional biochemistry. The third domain is sleep, which has gone underappreciated by Medicine 2.0 until relatively recently. The fourth domain encompasses a set of tools and techniques to manage and improve emotional health. Our fifth and final domain consists of the various drugs, supplements, and hormones that doctors learn about in medical school and beyond.
- Study after study has found that regular exercisers live as much as a decade longer than sedentary people.
- This is why I place such an emphasis on weight training—and doing it now, no matter your age.
- I start by presenting my patients with a long list of physical tasks that might include some of the following: Hike 1.5 miles on a hilly trail. Get up off the floor under your own power, using a maximum of one arm for support. Pick up a young child from the floor. Carry two five-pound bags of groceries for five blocks. Lift a twenty-pound suitcase into the overhead compartment of a plane. Balance on one leg for thirty seconds, eyes open. (Bonus points: eyes closed, fifteen seconds.) Have sex. Climb four flights of stairs in three minutes. Open a jar. Do thirty consecutive jump-rope skips.
- So I would probably add in some of the following events: Swim half a mile in twenty minutes. Walk with a thirty-pound dumbbell in each hand for one minute. Draw back and fire a fifty-pound compound bow. Do five pull-ups. Climb ninety steps in two minutes (VO2 max = 32). Dead-hang for one minute. Drive a race car within 5 to 8 percent of the pace I can do so today. Hike with a twenty-pound backpack for an hour. Carry my own luggage. Walk up a steep hill.
- A professional cyclist might spend thirty to thirty-five hours a week training on his or her bike, and 80 percent of that time in zone 2. For an athlete, this builds a foundation for all their other, more intense training. (The catch is that a professional rider’s zone 2 output feels like zone 5 for most people.)
- As fundamental as zone 2 training is for professional cyclists, however, San Millán believes that it’s even more important for nonathletes, for two reasons. First, it builds a base of endurance for anything else you do in life, whether that is riding your bike in a one-hundred-mile century ride or playing with your kids or grandkids. The other reason is that he believes it plays a crucial role in preventing chronic disease by improving the health and efficiency of your mitochondria, which is why training aerobic endurance and efficiency (i.e., zone 2 work) is the first element of my Centenarian Decathlon training program.
- When we are exercising in zone 2, most of the work is being done by our type 1, or “slow-twitch,” muscle fibers. These are extremely dense with mitochondria and thus well-suited for slow-paced, efficient endurance work. We can go for a long time without feeling fatigued. If we pick up the pace, we begin to recruit more type 2 (“fast-twitch”) muscle fibers, which are less efficient but more forceful.
- Because I am a numbers guy and I love biomarkers and feedback, I often test my own lactate while I am working out this way, using a small handheld lactate monitor, to make sure my pacing is correct. The goal is to keep lactate levels constant, ideally between 1.7 and 2.0 millimoles. This is the zone 2 threshold for most people. If I’m working too hard, lactate levels will rise, so I’ll slow down. (It’s sometimes tempting to go too hard in zone 2, because the workout feels relatively “easy” on good days.) I make a point of this because lactate is literally what defines zone 2. It’s all about keeping lactate levels steady in this range, and the effort sustainable.
- Even when we are at rest, our lactate levels tell us much about our metabolic health. People with obesity or other metabolic problems will tend to have much higher resting lactate levels, a clear sign that their mitochondria are not functioning optimally, because they are already working too hard just to maintain baseline energy levels. This means that they are relying almost totally on glucose (or glycogen) for all their energy needs—and that they are totally unable to access their fat stores.
- Zone 2 can be a bit boring on its own, so I typically use the time to listen to podcasts or audiobooks, or just think about issues that I’m working on—a side benefit of zone 2 is that it also helps with cognition, by increasing cerebral blood flow and by stimulating the production of BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, which we touched on earlier. This is another reason why zone 2 is such an important part of our Alzheimer’s disease prevention program.
- Where HIIT intervals are very short, typically measured in seconds, VO2 max intervals are a bit longer, ranging from three to eight minutes—and a notch less intense. I do these workouts on my road bike, mounted to a stationary trainer, or on a rowing machine, but running on a treadmill (or a track) could also work. The tried-and-true formula for these intervals is to go four minutes at the maximum pace you can sustain for this amount of time—not an all-out sprint, but still a very hard effort. Then ride or jog four minutes easy, which should be enough time for your heart rate to come back down to below about one hundred beats per minute. Repeat this four to six times and cool down.[*4]
- In a way, maximum aerobic output is like guitarist Nigel Tufnel’s special amplifier, in the classic film This Is Spinal Tap: Where most amps only let you turn the volume up to 10, his went up to 11. As he memorably explained, “It’s one louder.”
- Another metric that we track closely in our patients is their bone density (technically, bone mineral density or BMD). We measure BMD in every patient, every year, looking at both of their hips and their lumbar spine using DEXA. This also measures body fat and lean mass, so it’s a useful tool across all of the body-composition domains that we care about.
- A far more important measure of strength, I’ve concluded, is how much heavy stuff you can carry. I say this on the basis of my intuition but also research into hunter-gatherers and human evolution. Carrying is our superpower as a species. It’s one reason why we have thumbs, as well as long legs (and arms). No other animal is capable of carrying large objects from one place to another with any efficiency.
- I’ve also become semiobsessed with an activity called rucking, which basically means hiking or walking at a fast pace with a loaded pack on your back. Three or four days a week, I’ll spend an hour rucking around my neighborhood, up and down hills, typically climbing and descending several hundred feet over the course of three or four miles. The fifty- to sixty-pound pack on my back makes it quite challenging, so I’m strengthening my legs and my trunk while also getting in a solid cardiovascular session.
- I was introduced to this pastime by Michael Easter in his eye-opening book The Comfort Crisis. His intriguing thesis is that because we have removed all discomfort of any kind from modern life, we have lost touch with the fundamental skills (not to mention the frequent suffering) that once defined what it meant to be human. Carrying stuff over long distances is one of these skills; our ancestors likely had to range far and wide to hunt food for their families and then carry their kills back to camp to feed everyone.
- One thing I specifically focus on when rucking is the hills. Going uphill gives me a chance to push my VO2 max energy system; first-time ruckers are amazed at how taxing it is to walk up a 15 percent grade with even twenty pounds on your back—and then walk back down. (A good goal is to be able to carry one-quarter to one-third of your body weight once you develop enough strength and stamina.
- Fundamentally I structure my training around exercises that improve the following: Grip strength, how hard you can grip with your hands, which involves everything from your hands to your lats (the large muscles on your back). Almost all actions begin with the grip. Attention to both concentric and eccentric loading for all movements, meaning when our muscles are shortening (concentric) and when they are lengthening (eccentric). In other words, we need to be able to lift the weight up and put it back down, slowly and with control. Rucking down hills is a great way to work on eccentric strength, because it forces you to put on the “brakes.” Pulling motions, at all angles from overhead to in front of you, which also requires grip strength (e.g., pull-ups and rows). Hip-hinging movements, such as the deadlift and squat, but also step-ups, hip-thrusters, and countless single-leg variants of exercises that strengthen the legs, glutes, and lower back.
- I focus on these four foundational elements of strength because they are the most relevant to our Centenarian Decathlon—and also to living a fulfilling and active life in our later decades. If you can grip strongly, you can open a jar with ease. If you can pull, you can carry groceries and lift heavy objects. If you can do a hip-hinge correctly, you can get up out of a chair with no problem. You’re setting yourself up to age well. It’s not about how much weight you can deadlift now, but how well you will function in twenty or thirty or forty years.
- Even I was surprised to discover that there is an enormous body of literature linking better grip strength in midlife and beyond to decreased risk of overall mortality.[*5] The data are as robust as for VO2 max and muscle mass, in fact.
- Training grip strength is not overly complicated. One of my favorite ways to do it is the classic farmer’s carry, where you walk for a minute or so with a loaded hex bar or a dumbbell or kettlebell in each hand. (Bonus points: Hold the kettlebell up vertically, keeping your wrist perfectly straight and elbow cocked at ninety degrees, as though you were carrying it through a crowded room.) One of the standards we ask of our male patients is that they can carry half their body weight in each hand (so full body weight in total) for at least one minute,
- That said, a farmer’s carry is pretty straightforward (weight in each hand, arms at sides, walk). The most important tip is to keep your shoulder blades down and back, not pulled up or hunched forward. If you are new to strength training, start with light weights, even as low as ten to fifteen pounds, and work up from there.
- Another way to test your grip is by dead-hanging from a pull-up bar for as long as you can. (This is not an everyday exercise; rather, it’s a once-in-a-while test set.) You grab the bar and just hang there, supporting your body weight. This is a simple but sneakily difficult exercise that also helps strengthen the critically important scapular (shoulder) stabilizer muscles, which we will talk about in the next chapter. Here we like to see men hang for at least two minutes and women for at least ninety seconds at the age of forty.
- One of the tests we have our patients perform is stepping onto and off an eighteen-inch block and taking three full seconds to reach the ground (a forward step down, like descending a very tall step). The stepping up part is comparatively easy, but most people initially struggle with a controlled three-second descent. That requires eccentric strength and control.
- Sometimes you just want to focus on moving the weight quickly or moving a heavier load, but make sure at some point in each workout that you are taking the time to cue the eccentric phase of your lifts.
- Next is pulling, which is closely related to grip strength. Pulling motions are how we exert our will on the world, whether we are hoisting a bag of groceries out of the car trunk or climbing El Capitan. It is an anchor movement. In the gym, it typically takes the form of rows, where you’re pulling the weight toward your body, or pull-ups. A rowing machine, something I love to use for VO2 max training, is another simple and effective way to work on pulling strength.
- The final foundational element of strength is hip-hinging, which is what it sounds like: You bend at the hips—not the spine—to harness your body’s largest muscles, the gluteus maximus and the hamstrings. (I repeat: Do not bend your spine.) It is a very powerful move that is essential to life. Whether you are launching off an Olympic ski jump, picking up a lucky penny off the sidewalk, or simply getting up out of a chair, you are hip-hinging. Hip-hinging under high axial load, as with a heavy deadlift or squat, should be approached with care because of the risk of injury to the spine.
- If you’d like to know more after you’ve read this chapter, I suggest visiting the websites for DNS (www.rehabps.com) and the Postural Restoration Institute (PRI) (www.posturalrestoration.com), the two leading exponents of what I’m talking about here. Stability is an integral part of my training program. Twice a week, I spend an hour doing dedicated stability training, based on the principles of DNS, PRI, and other practices, with ten to fifteen minutes per day on the other days.
- Toe yoga is a lot harder than it sounds, which is why I’ve posted a video demonstration of this and other exercises at www.peterattiamd.com/​outlive/​videos. First, Beth tells her students to think of their feet as having four corners, each of which needs to be rooted firmly on the ground at all times, like the legs of a chair.
- Try to lift all ten toes off the ground and spread them as wide as you can. Now try to put just your big toe back on the floor, while keeping your other toes lifted. Trickier than you’d think, right? Now do the opposite: keep four toes on the floor and lift only your big toe. Then lift all five toes, and try to drop them one by one, starting with your big toe. (You get the idea.)[*3]
- This is why it’s important to (a) put down the phone, and (b) try to develop some proprioceptive awareness around your spine, so that you really understand what extension (bending back) and flexion (bending forward) feel like, at the level of each single vertebra. The easiest way to start this process is to get on your hands and knees and go through an extremely slowed-down, controlled Cat/Cow sequence, similar to the basic yoga poses of the same names.[*4]
- The difference is that you have to really, really slow down, moving so slowly and deliberately from one end of your spine to the other that you can feel each individual vertebra changing position, all the way from your tailbone up to your neck, until your spine is bent like a sway-backed cow. Then reverse the movement, tilting your pelvis forward and bending your spine one vertebra at a time until your back is arched again, like a really scared cat. (Note: Inhale on Cow, exhale on Cat.)
- Beth taught me a simple exercise to help understand the importance of scapular positioning and control, a movement known as Scapular CARs, for controlled articular rotations: Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and place a medium to light resistance band under your feet, one handle in each hand (a very light dumbbell also works). Keeping your arms at your sides, raise your shoulder blades, and then squeeze them back and together; this is retraction, which is where we want them to be when under load. Then drop them down your back. Finally, bring them forward to the starting point. We start out moving in squares like this, but the goal is to learn enough control that we can move our scapulae in smooth circles.
- One way that Beth likes to illustrate the importance of this is via a basic bicep curl with a (light) dumbbell. First, try the curl with your wrist bent slightly backward, just a bit out of line with your forearm. Now try the same bicep curl with your wrist straight. Which one felt stronger and more powerful? Which one felt like the fingers were more involved? It’s about building awareness of the importance of your fingers, as the last link in the chain.
- First, find a box or a sturdy chair such that when your foot is on the step your thigh will be parallel to the floor. For most people this is about sixteen to twenty inches, but if that is too difficult start with twelve inches. Place one foot on the box, making sure that the big toe and pinky toe mounds and the entire heel are connected firmly to its surface (I like to do these barefoot).
- It reminds me of a story about the great physicist (and one of my heroes) Richard Feynman being asked at a party to explain, briefly and simply, why he was awarded his Nobel Prize. He responded that if he could explain his work briefly and simply, it probably would not have merited a Nobel Prize.
- Instead of diet, we should be talking about nutritional biochemistry.
- The correlation between poor metabolic health and being overnourished and undermuscled is very high. Hence, for a majority of patients the goal is to reduce energy intake while adding lean mass. This means we need to find ways to get them to consume fewer calories while also increasing their protein intake, and to pair this with proper exercise. This is the most common problem we are trying to solve around nutrition.
- Nutrition is relatively simple, actually. It boils down to a few basic rules: don’t eat too many calories, or too few; consume sufficient protein and essential fats; obtain the vitamins and minerals you need; and avoid pathogens like E. coli and toxins like mercury or lead. Beyond that, we know relatively little with complete certainty. Read that sentence again, please.
- The point is that humans are terrible study subjects for nutrition (or just about anything else) because we are unruly, disobedient, messy, forgetful, confounding, hungry, and complicated creatures.
- In other words, I was on a vegan version of the SAD, the Standard American Diet.
- The leading source of calories that Americans consume is a category called “grain-based desserts,” like pies, cakes, and cookies, according to the US Department of Agriculture. That is our number one “food group.”
- One slight advantage is that calorie counting is agnostic to food choices; you can eat whatever you want so long as you stay within your daily allowance. But if you make too many poor decisions, you will be very hungry, so buyer beware. You can lose weight on a restricted-calorie diet consisting only of Snickers bars, but you will feel much better if you opt for steamed broccoli and chicken breasts instead.
- These two studies suggest that if you are eating a higher-quality diet—and are metabolically healthy to begin with—then severe caloric restriction may not even be necessary. The NIH control monkeys ate as much as they wanted of their better diet and still lived nearly as long as the CR monkeys in both studies.
- Alcohol serves no nutritional or health purpose but is a purely hedonic pleasure that needs to be managed. It’s especially disruptive for people who are overnourished, for three reasons: it’s an “empty” calorie source that offers zero nutrition value; the oxidation of ethanol delays fat oxidation, which is the exact opposite of what we want if we’re trying to lose fat mass; and drinking alcohol very often leads to mindless eating.
- My personal bottom line: if you drink, try to be mindful about it. You’ll enjoy it more and suffer fewer consequences. Don’t just keep drinking because they’re serving it on the plane. I strongly urge my patients to limit alcohol to fewer than seven servings per week, and ideally no more than two on any given day, and I manage to do a pretty good job adhering to this rule myself.
- foods. This is called continuous glucose monitoring, or CGM, and it has become a very important part of my armamentarium in recent years.[*2] The device consists of a microscopic filament sensor that is implanted in the upper arm, attached to a fingertip-sized transmitter that sends data[*3] to the patient’s phone in real time. As its name suggests, CGM gives continuous, real-time information on blood glucose levels, which is extraordinary: the patient can see, moment by moment, how their blood sugar levels are responding to whatever they eat, whether a doughnut, a steak, or a handful of Raisinets. More importantly, it also keeps track of glucose levels over time, capturing historical averages and variance, and registering each and every time that blood glucose spikes upward or crashes downward.
- It’s currently fairly easy for a nondiabetic to obtain a CGM from one of several online metabolic health start-ups.
- I’ve found that CGM powerfully activates the Hawthorne effect, the long-observed phenomenon whereby people modify their behavior when they are being watched.
- Overall, I like to keep average glucose at or below 100 mg/dL, with a standard deviation of less than 15 mg/dL.[*5] These are aggressive goals: 100 mg/dL corresponds to an HbA1c of 5.1 percent, which is quite low. But I believe that the reward, in terms of lower risk of mortality and disease, is well worth it given the ample evidence in nondiabetics and diabetics alike.
- Also, everyone tends to be more insulin sensitive in the morning than in the evening, so it makes sense to front-load our carb consumption earlier in the day.
- Another surprising thing I’ve learned thanks to CGM is about what happens to a patient’s glucose levels during the night. If she goes to bed at, say, 80 mg/dL, but then her glucose ramps up to 110 for most of the night, that tells me that she is likely dealing with psychological stress. Stress prompts an elevation in cortisol, which in turn stimulates the liver to drip more glucose into circulation. This tells me that we need to address her stress levels and probably also her sleep quality.
- So if someone weighs 180 pounds, they need to consume a minimum of 130 grams of protein per day, and ideally closer to 180 grams, especially if they are trying to add muscle mass. This is a lot of protein to eat, and the added challenge is that it should not be taken in one sitting but rather spread out over the day to avoid losing amino acids to oxidation (i.e., using them to produce energy when we want them to be available for muscle protein synthesis). The
- This is where it can get tricky. Protein is actually the most important macronutrient, the one macro that should not be compromised. Remember, most people will be overnourished—but also undermuscled. It is counterproductive for them to limit calories at the expense
- As we saw in chapter 12, zone 2 aerobic training can have a huge impact on our ability to dispose of glucose safely, and also on our ability to access energy we have stored as fat. And the more muscle mass we have, the more capacity we have to use and store excess glucose, and utilize stored fat. In
- If sleep is so unimportant, he asked, then why hasn’t evolution gotten rid of it?
- Why would evolution allow us to spend up to a third of our lives in a state of unconsciousness, where we could easily be killed or eaten? He pressed the issue: Don’t you think natural selection would have eliminated the need to sleep hundreds of millions of years ago—unless, somehow, it was absolutely essential?
- Good sleep is like a performance-enhancing drug. In one study, Stanford basketball players were encouraged to strive for ten hours of sleep per day, with or without naps, and to abstain from alcohol or caffeine. After five weeks, their shooting accuracy had improved by 9 percent, and their sprint times had also gotten faster.[*1]
- Interestingly, the electrical signature of REM sleep is very similar to that when we are awake; the main difference is that our body is paralyzed, which is probably not accidental, since it prevents us from acting on our bizarre dream thoughts. It wouldn’t be good if we could just get up and run around while we were in REM sleep. (This probably also explains those dreams where we are trying to run away from something and our body just won’t seem to cooperate.)
- Deep sleep is when the brain clears out its cache of short-term memories in the hippocampus and selects the important ones for long-term storage in the cortex, helping us to store and reinforce our most important memories of the day. Researchers have observed a direct, linear relationship between how much deep sleep we get in a given night and how well we will perform on a memory test the next day.
- In adulthood, our REM sleep time tends to plateau, but it remains important, especially for creativity and problem solving. By generating seemingly random associations between facts and memories, and by sorting out the promising connections from the meaningless ones, the brain can often come up with solutions to problems that stumped us the previous day.
- tolerance, based on genes and other factors (23andMe tests for one common caffeine-related gene).
- use a silky one called Alaska Bear that costs about $8 and works better than the fancier versions I’ve tried.